Welcome, everybody, to J.W. Broadcasting.
My co-host is brother Isaac Morelle,
and his given name is Isaac, but we all call him Socky.
I'm so glad to see you, Socky,
because we've got a lot of work today.
But first, you have quite an interesting background in the truth.
Why don't you tell us something about it?
Thank you. I'll be happy to do so.
I was born in South Africa in a very small town
called Blaifur Hsich.
My father was not one of Jova's witnesses.
He initially opposed my mother,
who was a dedicated servant of Jehovah,
but later changed and was very supportive.
My mother served Jehovah faithfully until her death in 2017.
My grandfather, and great-grandfather on my mother's side,
came into the truth in the early 1920s,
simply by reading a tract.
When I was about 10 years old,
I read the book, What is Religion Done for Mankind?
And I was convinced that my mother had the truth.
My two brothers and three sisters also embraced the truth
at an early age.
And to this day, all of them served Jehovah faithfully
in various parts of the earth.
While I was in my final year at school,
I was invited to come to Bethel.
And I started Bethel's service in January 1965 in South Africa.
Bethel was located in Ilans, Fontaine,
not far from Johannesburg.
The Bethel family had only 55 members then.
I had no particular skill, education, or training
when I came to Bethel.
Two older brothers in the small family, Andrew Jack,
from Scotland, and Hertnell from South Africa,
took me under their wing,
because they knew I had so much to learn.
They taught me how to apply Bible principles
in the school of life,
as outlined in Proverbs 1 verses 1 through 7.
Andrew Jack taught me how to work,
and reminded me always to glorify Jehovah.
Hertnell, an African translator since 1947,
taught me how to reason on scriptural principles.
Both of them finished the earthly course long ago,
but their example of loyalty still has deep impact
on the loyal servants of Jehovah in Southern Africa.
I had several assignments over the years
in translation, and in the printery,
and I worked mostly in cleaning assignments.
In 1976, I married Jean,
who served as a pioneer in Durban.
She was born in Malawi, but she grew up in South Africa.
She said a great example for me,
by working diligently at every assignment that she was given.
She always has a good attitude,
and works as to Jehovah and not to men.
Very good.
After serving at the South Africa branch for a few years,
we were transferred to the United States Bethel in 1981.
We've served in Walkill, Brooklyn, Patterson,
and are now serving in Walwick.
Well, thanks for sharing.
I know I've been built up by hearing your experience,
and I'm sure the friends feel the same way.
Why don't you give us the highlights
of what we can expect during the program?
I'll be glad to, David.
As this system nears its end,
we may at times feel trapped and helpless.
How can we be sure that Jehovah is still helping us?
Many years ago, Karen found joy and fulfillment
with her spiritual family,
but her life-serving Jehovah hasn't been easy.
We'll see how she's doing
in the next episode of the series.
Where are they now?
Have you ever wished that you could have more conversations
in the ministry?
Our latest episode of Iron Chopin's Iron
provides suggestions for doing so.
This is the April 2024 edition of J.W. Broadcasting.
An outstanding fact is recorded at Isaiah 55,
10 and 11.
For just as the rain and the snow pour down from heaven,
and do not return there until they saturate the earth,
making it produce and sprout,
giving seed to the sower and bread to the eater.
Now notice this.
So my word, my word that goes out of my mouth will be.
It will not return to me without results,
but it will certainly accomplish whatever is my delight.
The word of God is the statement of His purpose.
Now, it can be delivered orally or in writing.
We call the Bible God's written word and rightly so.
But long before writing was invented,
Jehovah expresses purpose in words.
And God said, let there be light.
And there was light.
Through Isaiah, Jehovah is telling us that
He will always accomplish His purpose.
So no matter how powerful,
fighters against that purpose seem to be,
they will always lose in the end.
Remembering that will help us
when we're faced with a poser so seem unbeatable.
So I thought we might consider some Bible examples
that illustrate the point.
Take the days of King Saul, for example.
Now, Jehovah sent Samuel to anoint the next king of Israel.
And as recorded at 1 Samuel 161,
God said to Samuel,
I will send you to Jesse, the Bethlehemite,
because I have selected from among His sons a king for myself.
Saul's replacement turned out to be David.
He was Jehovah's choice.
At some point, Saul himself understood that.
In fact, according to 1 Samuel 2317,
his son Jonathan said to David,
you will be king over Israel.
And my father Saul also knows that.
Confirming this, on one occasion Saul said to David,
I know that you will surely rule as king.
It's quite of it all.
Saul tried to kill David,
and he had the support of a powerful army.
Saul himself was apparently a very strong man.
Still, it was God's will for David to become king,
and Saul knew it.
So we ask,
why did Saul keep on fighting?
And whom was he fighting really?
Not just David.
He was fighting against God.
Saul was setting himself up for failure.
No doubt Satan was egging Saul on.
If Satan could cause just one of Jehovah's promises to fail.
But in the end,
the word of God prevailed.
David became king.
Well, who would replace David when the time came?
That was also Jehovah's decision to make, and he made it.
According to First Chronicles 22, 9 and 10,
Jehovah told David,
look, you will have a son.
Solomon will be his name.
And I will firmly establish the throne of his kingship
over Israel forever.
So Solomon would be the next king of Israel.
Who could prevent that from happening?
David's son, Adonajah tried,
and failed.
Why?
As quoted at First Kings 215,
and he later admitted,
the kingship eluded me and became my brothers,
for it was from Jehovah that it became his.
If Adonajah thought he could outmaneuver Jehovah,
he was sadly mistaken.
Jehovah promised the Israelites that he would give them
the land of Canaan as an inheritance.
The Canaanites had other ideas.
They'd heard of Jehovah's powerful works in Egypt,
but they fought against him anyway.
They learned.
They learned at their cost,
but fighters against God always lose.
Now, if you were asked to name some prominent fighters against God
in Jesus' day,
you might think of King Herod the Great,
the Jewish high priest, Kayathus,
and maybe the Roman governor, Pontius Pilate.
Let's talk about them.
First, Herod the Great.
Let's read Matthew chapter 2, verses 1 and 2.
Now astrologers visit King Herod,
and they ask a strange question.
We read,
after Jesus had been born in Bethlehem of Judea,
in the days of Herod the King.
Look, astrologers from the east came to Jerusalem,
saying,
where is the one born king of the Jews?
King of the Jews?
For we saw his star when we were in the east,
and we have come to do obeisance to him.
Did you notice something strange here?
No angel had spoken to those astrologers.
Yet when the men saw light in heaven,
they concluded that it signaled the birth of the King of the Jews.
That's a stretch.
Who do you suppose put that idea in their head?
And who do you suppose gave them the bright idea
to ask the present king of Israel about his future rival?
That has taken the devil written all over it, doesn't it?
Now, notice verses 3 and 4.
At hearing this,
King Herod was agitated and all Jerusalem with him,
on gathering together all the chief priests and scribes of the people.
He inquired of them where the Christ was to be born.
Interesting.
Herod doesn't just ask where the future king of the Jews will be born.
He asks where the Christ will be born.
Now, as a Jewish proselyt,
he's supposed to be waiting for the Christ, the Messiah.
Yet, now that the Messiah has come,
Herod wants to kill him.
Herod is fighting against God.
Does he win?
No. Jesus escapes his clutches.
And a few months later, Herod himself dies.
Few mourn his death.
In Jesus' day, the Jewish high priests were appointed
and removed by the Romans.
Now, high priest Kaphos was a skilled politician.
He knew how to please the Romans.
And because of that, he hung onto his job a lot longer than many others.
And he had a powerful supporter, Pontius Pilate.
With his connections, Kaphos seemed untouchable.
Pilate himself was very well connected.
He had a good friend in high places in Rome.
Pontius, Sajanus.
Now, maybe you've never heard of Sajanus before.
But he was probably the most powerful man in the Roman Empire.
The emperor left most of the major decisions to Sajanus.
Now, he made many enemies, but they were powerless against him.
Until?
Until the fall of 31 CE.
At that time, Sajanus got on the wrong side of the emperor
and was put to death.
After that, the emperor commanded that anyone who had been friends with Sajanus
was to be executed.
How do you think Pilate felt?
He must have been a nervous wreck.
As we said, he and Sajanus had been very close.
And now, a year and a half after Sajanus was executed,
what do you suppose Pilate was thinking?
When the Jewish rulers cried out,
if you release Jesus, you are no friend of Caesar.
Some scholars believe that this was a factor in Pilate's decision to order Jesus' execution
to protect his own job.
Did he protect it?
No.
Pilate wasn't immediately struck by lightning,
but less than four years after he sentenced Jesus to death,
he got into big trouble and was recalled to Rome.
With no powerful friend to defend him,
Pilate was removed as Roman governor.
What happened next isn't clear.
Some say Pilate committed suicide, others say he was banished.
Whatever happened, it wasn't good.
When Pilate lost his job,
Kephas lost his protector,
and soon he was removed as high priest.
Thus, two fighters against God,
Pilate and Kephas were dispatched,
soon after they committed their greatest crime.
We certainly don't want to be fighters against Jehovah God.
How can we cooperate with this purpose today?
Consider this scenario.
A brother offends you.
Says something thoughtless.
You're hurt.
Now how does Jehovah view that person?
He's God's friend.
Jehovah loves his friends.
He wants you to love them too.
And what's God's purpose for the brother who offended you?
He wants him to enjoy life forever.
Now, how can you work along with Jehovah's purpose?
If you can just overlook the offense,
Jehovah will appreciate that.
But if you can't overlook it,
Jehovah would want you to approach the person in a kind, respectful way.
You might say something like this.
Maybe I'm being too sensitive,
but I was hurt by what you said the other day.
No, I know you didn't mean to hurt me,
but I thought I'd let you know how I felt.
If the person responds favorably,
and unity is restored,
then you imagine how pleased Jehovah will be.
In Matthew chapter 18,
Jesus gave the illustration of the lost sheep.
A man had a hundred sheep.
One got lost.
The shepherd left the ninety-nine in the field
and went to great lengths to find the sheep that had strayed
and bring it back to the fold.
Is it a coincidence that right after telling that story,
Jesus outlined three steps we should follow
when someone has sinned seriously against us.
At Matthew 18, 15,
Jesus tells us what our goal should be when we follow those steps.
Let's read that.
Moreover, if your brother commits a sin,
go and reveal his fault between you and him alone.
If he listens to you,
notice you have gained your brother.
The brother who sinned against us
may be like that lost sheep.
What should be our goal?
To gain our brother, not to expose him,
not to get revenge, not to prove him wrong,
not to shame him, but to get him back.
Like that loving shepherd,
we're willing to go to great lengths
to bring that airing brother back to the fold.
Of course, if the brother is an unrepentant sinner,
the elders will follow the third step outlined by Jesus,
and he'll be removed from the congregation.
How else can we work along with Jehovah's purpose?
We can do that by being involved in the preaching work.
The Word has gone out.
This good news of the kingdom must be preached
in all the inhabited earth.
Many have tried to prevent that from happening.
In the early 20th century,
a few prominent brothers opposed the organization's efforts
to get everyone involved in the preaching work.
Those dignitaries were quite happy to get all dressed up
and give public talks to large audiences,
but they refused to lower themselves
to go from house to house.
They were fighting against God,
and the angels soon sifted them out.
Most of them were never heard of again.
Even in countries where there's a measure of religious freedom,
fighters against God have tried to prevent us
from carrying out our commission.
You need a permit to go from house to house.
You can't offer magazines on the street.
You people are a dangerous sect.
They've even enacted laws directed at stopping our work.
Unless they change their ways,
those lawmakers are going to be in big trouble.
The Word has gone out.
As you go, preach.
That great work will be accomplished
with their support or in spite of them.
Well, as we've mentioned,
fighters against God sometimes seem to get away
with the acts of rebellion,
but they're on a slippery slope.
I can't express it better than David did
in Psalm 37, 1 and 2.
Do not be upset because of evil men
or envious of wrongdoers.
They will quickly weather like grass
and shrivel like green new grass.
So, when you hear about powerful opposers
who seem to be untouchable,
remember what we've discussed.
These men may seem to prosper for a while,
but since they're fighting against God,
they're more to be pitted than to be feared.
They're on the wrong side.
They are fighting a losing battle.
Thank you, Brothers Plain, for your encouraging discussion.
Fighters against God always lose.
How reassuring that is to all of us.
Trusting Jehovah when faced
with one problem after another is not easy,
but it can refine us.
Please listen,
as Sister Seagrid did tofully explain
how she learned this lesson.
World War II was going on.
Getting worse and worse,
we got the evacuation notice
and we had to leave.
People did terrible things to people.
They were afraid.
No matter where you looked,
there were worldly possessions, material things.
And everybody threw more things
and nobody picked anything up.
But they cared where things
said would save their life at the moment, something to eat.
I really didn't know how I would spend my life at that time, right?
But I knew that I would not use it to get rich,
to work and work for what?
I wasn't dedicated to Jehovah at that time.
Even so, I knew Jehovah wasn't reprieved to him.
And I'm sure he helped us.
In 1946, we found out my father was alive
and my sister was alive.
We were very privileged to be united as a family.
And at that time,
my father was near Berlin.
And so he started all over again.
My father, he found a book,
The Heart of God,
and started to study the Bible
with my sister and with myself.
And little by little,
he started a congregation at our house.
Now, coming to know Jehovah,
learning about the paradise,
I wanted to tell people about it.
I knew I would have a purpose in life.
I heard about Gilead,
and he said, oh boy, that's where I want to go.
I wanted to be a missionary.
I tell the people about the paradise.
The official ban on the waitresses
in the eastern zone of Germany came 1950.
But months before,
we were already being observed.
My father got literature for the congregation.
Many times he would send me on a bicycle
through the forest with a literature.
So it's interesting when you're in that situation.
You might go to prison.
You just don't worry about it.
You trust in Jehovah.
And you just go ahead.
And that's what our family did.
Then my father went to the branch
and they told him,
Max, there's an assembly in Berlin.
And if you come,
don't bring a Bible,
don't bring a songbook,
bring nothing.
So, when my father came back
from that meeting,
he told us,
and he said, well,
if we go,
it looks like we can't come back.
So I said, I'm going.
And my mother said, I'm going.
So we all made up our mind.
We would go.
That means we would get prepared
to leave everything again, right?
So I just put one dress
on top of the other,
took the bicycle and I'll be right.
Shortly after we left,
a police car came
and they looked for us.
It was a special arrangement
and privilege to be
at a convention in Berlin.
So we all thanked Jehovah
that we were there to listen to
and be strengthened
that spiritual food.
And after the convention,
we were recognized as refugees.
Got out on a plane
to West Germany.
My father said, well,
now here, for the second time,
we lost all the material things
we had in Germany here.
So we better immigrate
to the United States
where my sister was,
that we all would be together.
And I said, good,
I get close to Gilead.
And then I was privileged
to attend the 29th class of Gilead.
And my assignment was Brazil.
And it was like paradise.
And there,
I met my husband
who was my circuit overseer.
And so I was privileged
to travel with him.
That was a great, great blessing.
All money can pay for the blessings I have.
Life is the most important thing there is
because no matter how much you have,
you can't prolong your life.
And then learning about Jehovah
who gave his son
to safest from all those terrible things.
Why wouldn't you use your life
to serve him?
Trust in Jehovah.
And do what you can do
to serve him from your heart.
He will never leave you.
Sister De Toffoli's story
is not unlike what many of our brothers
are going through right now.
The following dramatization
is based on the real life experiences
of some of our brothers.
It's been three days
since the bomb started to fall.
When the fighting got closer,
we hit.
But I'm not sure how much longer we can stay here.
Some in the congregation
plan to leave the country.
Mother says we'll try to
when the shelling comes down.
But it feels like it may never stop.
Jehovah, can you still see us?
Luda, you can finish this.
We have a little more.
Always writing like your father.
Thank you, Grandma.
You're worried about our brothers and sisters.
Do you remember the day's text?
No weapon formed against you
will have any success.
That's right.
When we were under ban,
Satan did everything to break our faith
for decades.
But he couldn't stop us preaching.
You know why?
No.
Nothing can take Jehovah's law
away from his people.
They tried.
But we just threw closer to him.
Jehovah cared for us then.
And he still does.
Even if we lose our lives,
that weapon will have no success
because of the resurrection.
Luda, it's time.
We have to go now.
It took forever to get to the station.
One by one, trains left the city.
There were so many people.
So much fear.
Many of the brothers were arrested
because they would not fight.
But a few were with us.
The soldier will need to see your IDs.
Let's make a line.
Hours felt like days.
I didn't know if we would get on.
There's no more room from you back
to the shelter now.
We can try again tomorrow.
Luda, Jehovah will care for us.
This is just a delay, not a defeat.
Come, please.
I'll have to go check on the others.
But I'll text you the moment we know more.
What are you thinking about?
I wish Papa were here with us.
I know you do.
Your father knew you so well.
I miss them too.
What hurts?
I think of Jehovah's special promise
to care for us.
Do you remember?
Yes.
Psalms 68.5.
A father of the fatherless.
I want to trust him.
You can.
The trains have stopped.
Sheldon destroyed some of the tracks.
What?
Are we trapped?
Don't worry, dear.
But we just know we are here.
Jehovah won't forget us.
Let's pray.
We're here.
We're over here.
I'm sorry, it took so long.
Did you hear about the trains?
Don't worry. There is good news.
We couldn't leave.
But brothers and sisters in a safe part of the city
opened their homes to us.
I learned that a war can't stop Jehovah.
He'll always find a way to care for his people.
Nothing can take Jehovah's love away.
I don't know where he will guide us.
But I trust him.
Luda trusted in Jehovah
and was not overreached by fear or discouragement.
What does it mean to be overreached?
Listen carefully as Brother Harold Corcoran explains
in this morning worship program.
The expression used in our days tax,
the word used is overreached.
And what comes to mind when we hear someone
that has been overreached?
Well, to overreach means to get better off,
or get the better off,
especially by deceit or trickery,
to outwit, to overtake, to overpower.
And so we have to be very careful at all times
because their enemy, the devil,
is out to trick us, deceive us, overtake us
on any occasion possible.
And he has quite a variety of tactics, doesn't he?
In fact, the Bible in Ephesians 6, 11 describes these
as the crafty acts of the devil.
Now, our context of today's text in the background
helps us to illustrate just two of those tactics.
We invite you to open your Bibles to sect of Corinthians 2.
And in Paul's first letter to the Corinthians,
the congregation had been affected by a man
who had been overreached by Satan,
being involved in very gross sexual immorality.
When on the top of his being overreached,
the congregation was tolerating it.
And so what did Paul tell them in very clear terms?
You must hand such a man over to Satan,
remove the wicked person from among you.
Well, the congregation responded,
and eventually this very man
who had been living such an immoral life really repented.
And now, permissiveness
and tolerating badness was no longer the issue,
what was the issue?
Now a matter of forgiving such a man.
In sect of Corinthians chapter 2, we read verse 6,
this rebuke given by the majority is sufficient for such a man.
Now you should instead kindly forgive and comfort him
so that he may not be overwhelmed by excessive sadness.
And who was behind that ploy of excessive sadness, verse 11,
so that we may not be overreached by Satan
for we are not ignorant of his designs.
So the devil will use whatever,
the temptation of sexual immorality,
being overly permissive,
or being harsh, unforgiving, and lacking mercy,
both of those tactics can be very effective
in taking Jehovah's people away from their Heavenly Father.
But on this matter of temptations
when it comes to sexual immorality,
let's just briefly talk about another tactic that the devil uses.
He can convince someone that they can taste or toy with
things that might be unclean or are unclean,
but there will be no lasting harm or no serious consequences to that.
They may even touch something unclean
and nothing apparently bad has happened,
and they conclude that it's okay.
But such a person is forgetting the unchangeable law of Jehovah
has recorded in Galatians 6.7,
whatever a man is soying, this he will also reap.
Now just illustrate that how the devil can use bait
against somebody that they're not really into any kind of trouble,
and yet he will catch them.
We're going to tell you an account that goes back many years.
There was a group of young men
at a freshwater lake and they were fishing,
and they could look down into this lake
and they could see these big bass, beautiful fish.
And they tried all sorts of lures.
They tried worms on hooks, artificial lures,
those big fish would not bite.
But then an older gentleman came along and he said,
give me one of your worms,
and he took the worm without the hook,
and he threw it out in the vicinity where these big bass were.
And a bass came and he took the worm.
He said, throw another one without the hook.
Throw it, the bass took it,
and now he said,
put the worm on the hook and cast.
The fish was caught.
What is the lesson?
The devil will give us bait sometimes,
and it appears that it's very pleasurable.
There's nothing wrong here.
It's harmless.
But with the devil, there is always the hook,
always the hook,
that can cause spiritual, emotional, mental,
and even physical harm.
It can literally cost us our life
if we get tricked to thinking
that uncleanness will not hurt us.
Now besides pleasure and the temptations that go with that,
the devil will also use pain and suffering.
For example, in the experience of Job,
he lost his material possessions.
He lost his children.
He got very ill.
That caused all sorts of physical and emotional pain.
Not pleasure.
And with all that he was going through,
then his so-called friends come to comfort him.
And they accuse him of all sorts of bad attitudes and actions.
And they even put doubts in Job's mind or try to
that Jehovah couldn't be pleased anyway.
Well, that was one of the toughest tests that he faced.
This from with his friends and the words that they sent.
Well, commenting on this,
the August 15th, 2002 watchtower,
said this about how a great test can come
from our fellow worshipers.
It says this,
Satan still makes use of misguided counsel
or thoughtless remarks from friends and fellow believers.
Discouragement from within the congregation
and undermining our morale more easily
than persecution from without.
And then this article went on to explain that there was a brother serving as an elder,
but he had seen active combat in the army.
He had been through terrible things.
But when he faced criticism,
thoughtless remarks,
and was hurt by his fellow workers in the congregation,
what did he say about those tests within the congregation?
He says,
it's the hardest thing I've ever been through in my life.
So what can the devil use?
Our own brothers can say or do things sometimes,
and the devil will play on that and amplify that
and cause one to stop serving Job.
Well, obviously there's a variety of crafty acts,
and we've only covered just a couple of them this morning.
But what do we do to protect ourselves?
James 4.7 says,
therefore, subject yourselves to God,
but oppose the devil.
And when we do that,
we always must remember
the model prayer given by Jesus,
where he said,
deliver us from the wicked one.
Now, why is that so important?
Well, we bear Jehovah's name,
and he is very anxious to protect his name,
and he loves us very much.
He's our father.
And like any loving father,
if he saw one of his faithful sons going through a terrible trial
by someone that was trying to kill him,
that father would respond quickly, wouldn't he?
Well, how does Jehovah feel about us?
Well, let's open our Bibles to the book of Malachi,
and just re-emphasize how much Jehovah cares for us,
and why he would respond so quickly to our Christ
for help to deliver us from the wicked one.
And Malachi 3 and verse 17,
it says,
and they will be mine,
says Jehovah of armies.
In the day when I produce a special property,
I will show them compassion just as a man shows compassion
to his son who serves him.
Well, that warm arrangement there, isn't it?
And Jehovah cares for us.
Other Bible translations when it talks about special property
use these expressions.
My very own.
My most prized possession.
My jewels.
Jehovah loves us.
And Jehovah will only allow the devil to go so far
in testing us, only according to what Jehovah wills at the moment.
For example,
remember in the case of Job when fire came down from heaven
and consumed Job's flock of sheep,
and even some of his servants,
the devil calls that fire.
Jehovah allowed it.
But later in 1 Kings chapter 18,
at the fire test at Mount Carmel,
when there were two bulls,
and the idea was to figure out who is the true God.
Jehovah or a bale.
And those bale worshipers went from morning to night,
crying out to their false God,
and not one flicker of flame could be produced.
Jehovah would not allow the devil to even burn up one bull
in contrast to what he had done with all those many sheep.
Jehovah is in control.
And what Jehovah allows today,
we can be sure,
whatever he allows the devil to do,
to cause his emotional pain, physical pain,
to even persecute us,
perhaps even kill some of us.
By means of his son Christ Jesus,
Jehovah has made a way to break up the works of the devil completely.
So whatever happens,
when we stay loyal to Jehovah,
and we are on guard against the crafty acts of the devil,
we will not be overreached.
No permanent harm can come to Jehovah's people
by this deceitful treacherous enemy.
May all of us continue to stay on the alert.
Be mindful of the devil's tactics.
Beg Jehovah to deliver us,
and then we can be confident that our loving Heavenly Father
will never abandon us.
Satan may even use family members
who mean well to discourage us from serving Jehovah.
If this is your situation,
you will find the following episode
of where are they now,
especially strengthening.
My name is Karen Malone,
and I was born in Iowa,
but I was raised all over
because my dad was in the military.
When I think about Karen
and how she came to the truth that touches my heart,
because she had no family in the truth,
and in fact they didn't support her at all.
Once I knew who Jehovah was,
I made it a goal in my life
that I just wanted to serve him forever,
and I wanted to be happy doing it.
I met Karen at Bethel.
She was special pioneering in Tennessee,
and I was serving at Bethel,
and she came through on tour.
A year later, so we got married,
and then nine months later,
we went back to Bethel.
Well, in 1980,
we left Bethel,
we had our daughter that year.
It changed things,
but you just give your energy
and your love and your time
into whatever assignment Jehovah gives us.
She would take the kids out
with her in the field ministry during a week,
and she always made it fun.
That was one of the things
that was important to her
that when the kids went in the field ministry,
that they enjoyed it.
It's just a matter of,
blooming where you're planted,
wherever you're at.
We didn't ever walk into a congregation
and expect people to come up to us.
We'd be proactive in meeting people,
and trying to become a part of wherever we were put,
so that we could become our home.
It's just loving them.
If they needed soup, we'd make soup.
If they needed a meal,
if they needed their house cleaned,
if they needed a babysitter,
if there was a need,
we wanted to help them with it.
There's so many challenges in life
that try to rob us of our peace,
and it's our choice if we let them.
So, we don't let them.
We were invited back to Bethel in 2007,
and we've been there since.
I came into a beautiful department,
healthcare department,
with people that were experts at it.
To bloom where I was planted,
when I was put in front of these two computer screens,
took a lot of prayer.
And I remember literally going to the bathroom
and crying and telling Jehovah,
look, I know you can part the Red Sea.
You're going to have to get this information
from here to here,
because I was a blank paint,
and the beautiful thing is that
two precious sisters, Bonnie and Zuma,
that I still treasure and work with,
they helped me,
and they taught me.
You know, the expression,
if you can't change your circumstance,
change your attitude.
So, I really made it a matter of prayer,
and again, I had wonderful helpers
that taught me and helped me to learn.
When I first learned the truth,
I realized that there's scriptures
that teach us the truth,
and then there's scriptures
that will keep us in the truth.
And I call those my heart scriptures.
And those are my two go-to scriptures
when things were rough,
when I was dealing with things,
something was trying to rob me of my joy.
I'd refer to those heart scriptures,
and they would reinforce the conviction
that, oh, no, you're not going to win Satan.
My favorite scripture
that I think epitomizes that
is Proverbs 27 and 11,
which we all know where it says,
be wise, my son,
and make my heart rejoice,
so that I can make a reply
to him who taunts me.
That's what it's all about.
It's about Jehovah's name,
and to make a reply to the devil,
his sovereignty is what's important.
It's not about us.
We really love being parents,
loved pioneering together.
We've loved every gift that we've been given.
I tell my kids,
each day we live as a gift from God,
how we live it is our gift to him.
The truth is only hard if we fight it.
If we listen to Jehovah,
if we do what we're asked,
the blessings will catch up with us.
The best day we could have here
and when, oh, we've all had wonderful days,
is nothing in comparison
to the first day in the new world.
It's such an amazing thought
to think that all we have to do
is make good choices now,
and we're going to be there.
How delighted we are
that Karen not only found the support
of spiritual family,
but now contributes so much to it.
Our spiritual family can bring us much joy and peace,
as we'll see in this month's music video.
It's hard to face this life with all we see.
To not focus on the uncertainty.
If she starts at times,
we all may feel
but when we pray,
his promise is read.
He gives us peace like a river.
He's like a ghost and strong.
His peace will flow forever.
Yes, peace like a river is listening.
He's always there.
But us and God are heart and mind.
And failing love from his eyes.
He's like a river.
He's like a ghost and strong.
His peace will flow forever.
Yes, peace like a river is listening.
His peace like a river is listening.
What do you do in the ministry
when it seems like no one is home?
As we'll see in this next episode
of Iron Shopping's Iron,
there may still be many opportunities
all around us to give a witness.
Hello, I am Victor Annie Barber
and this is Iron Shopping's Iron.
Now, so far in our series,
we've discussed how we can become more effective
at our ministry in a number of different ways,
such as by starting conversations,
asking questions and getting better at return visits.
But these techniques only work
if we actually find people to talk to.
And sometimes that can be our greatest challenge.
Have you ever had days like this in the ministry
when it seemed that there was just no one to talk to?
If so, you'll be pleased to know that our literature
is full of tips that can help us contact more people
in our territory.
In this episode, we will consider
three that have proved to be very effective.
Tip number one,
be observance.
There may actually be more opportunities
for us to contact people
if we actually know where to look.
Take, for example, our brothers and sisters
that we were just watching.
Now, it is true that there was no one at home,
but does that mean there was no one to talk to?
Well, let's see.
Hey!
You're so cute.
What's the name?
And just like that, a conversation is underway.
Now, how about our couple getting back into their car?
By being observant,
they too were able to give a witness.
The more observant we are,
the more opportunities we may find.
The key is to remain focused on our objective,
which is to give a witness.
And that can happen in between doors,
just as easily as it could happen at the doors.
So how about our tip number two?
It is be prepared.
How often have you encountered someone in your territory
who doesn't speak your language?
You know, growing up in London,
this used to happen all the time.
But these days, it's not just big cities
where we find this mixture of culture and languages.
The whole world is becoming so much more cosmopolitan.
So what can we do to be prepared?
Well, we don't have the gift of tongues
like the first century Christians did at Pentecost.
But we do have the gift of J-W language.
Now, with this app, you can learn a simple presentation
in dozens of different languages.
Let's take a look.
It's designed in a very easy-to-use manner.
First,
set the primary language to the one you speak
and the target language to the one you want to learn.
Then, under preaching skills,
choose greetings and introductions
to learn how to say a simple hello.
And I'm pleased to meet you.
What was the Yomitisa?
Dobriden Priyemno Yomitisa.
I think I've made a mess of that.
Let's try it again.
Dobriden Priyemno Paznoyomitisa.
Well, I still need to work on my accent.
But I think you get the idea.
With a little practice,
you can ask simple questions
and even introduce and explain a scripture.
It really works.
Let's look at an example.
Hi there. We're making brief visits on our native.
Hi, no, no speaking.
Oh, Arabic.
Arabic.
Oh, did you speak Arabic?
Yes.
What a great way to give a witness
to even more in our territory.
Now, if mastering a whole presentation
in another language seems a bit overwhelming,
then here's a simple suggestion.
Just learn a greeting.
It's only a few words,
but don't underestimate the power
of greeting someone in their native tongue
and with a warm smile.
It can certainly open up doors
and it could also pave the way
for you to call back with someone
who does speak their language.
And that brings us on to our third tip.
Be diligent and follow up.
Which, first of all, means trying to contact all those
who weren't home initially,
either on a different day
or at a different time.
And if you can't find them in that way,
then don't overlook letter writing
and telephone witnessing.
These methods prove very effective
during the pandemic.
And even now, they can still help us
to reach those we can't find at home.
Regardless of what way we have contacted someone,
please be sure not to forget them,
but return promptly to follow up
on any interest that you have found.
You know, reaching everyone in our territory
is definitely a challenge.
But the tips we've discussed here today,
one being observant,
two being prepared,
and three being diligent
as we follow up on interest that we find,
can help all of us fully accomplish our ministry.
If we do that,
we'll be imitating Jesus
who wanted to give everyone
an opportunity to come to know Jehovah.
What excellent suggestions for the ministry.
I look forward to using them
during our upcoming regional convention campaign.
Would you like to have a look
at what to expect from this year's convention program?
Good news is needed now
more than ever.
The good news we need is not of human origin.
It originates with the giver of real hope,
Jehovah God.
And it centers on his son,
Jesus Christ.
What is this good news?
Can we trust it?
And can it help people right now?
This year's declared the good news convention
of Jehovah's Witnesses
will bolster confidence
in God and his son.
The good news of God's Kingdom
will help you to cope with life now
and prepare you for eternal life
in the future.
Now that is good news.
We have a lot to look forward to
at this year's convention.
And what a faith-straining program
we've just enjoyed.
We learned that anyone who fights against God
is on the losing side of the battle.
We show our desire to work with God
by keeping peace in the congregation
and by giving our all in the preaching work.
In the dramatization,
young Luda learned that Jehovah
never abandons his loyal ones.
And our music video beautifully illustrated
that peace and strength belong to those
who rely on Jehovah.
We have one more treat in store for you.
We're happy to announce
a new series for our young people
called Learn from Jehovah's Friends.
These short animated videos will teach those
who are starting to read on their own
about persons in the Bible
who love Jehovah.
Look for it on JW Broadcasting soon.
A video postcard this month
comes from a place known
of incorruptible people.
Where might that be?
The country's name combines two words,
integrity in the Moray language
and homeland in the Jula language.
It's Burkina Faso,
a landlocked country in West Africa.
The first kingdom publisher arrived in Burkina Faso
from Ghana in 1959.
In 1972, the first of many
intrepid missionaries arrived.
And just two years later,
congregations were formed in the capital,
Wagadougou,
and in Bobo de Alassou
in the west of the country.
Daytime temperatures average around 30 degrees Celsius
or 86 degrees Fahrenheit,
and may be much warmer
during the peak of the dry season.
Often, a host will welcome visitors
with a drink of water.
A common saying in the Moray language
is san lakorum,
which literally means the guest is water.
Jehovah's people are working hard
to take life-giving waters
of Bible truth to the nearly 23 million people
scattered in villages through the savanna and forest.
In March 2023,
Burkina Faso reached a new peak
of 684 auxiliary pioneers.
Today,
there are over 2,000 publishers
in Burkina Faso.
This is no small feat,
owing to the travel difficulties between villages
and the 66 indigenous languages
spoken throughout the country.
Two remote translation offices
produced literature for the Moray and Jula languages.
And in 2023,
our brothers were overjoyed
to receive the complete new world translation
in the Moray language.
The brothers and sisters
from the Camboyansi Moray
and the Tampoyi Moray congregations
sent their love and affection
to the worldwide brotherhood.
We hope you enjoyed our monthly program.
And I want to thank you, Sake, for all your help.
It was really appreciated.
Welcome.
From the World Headquarters of Jehovah's Witnesses,
this is JW Broadcasting.